many people have misunderstood my
critique of the video game playing
mentality many people have misunderstood
my critique of the excuse making
mentality because they are highly highly
motivated to misunderstand it a lot of
people are living as adults with a sunk
cost fallacy in relation to video games
what does that mean it means when you've
already spent a lot of money on
something you tend to want to justify
the purchase you made you tend to want
to invent reasons in your own head to
explain to yourself to reassure yourself
that you spent your money in a
worthwhile way that it wasn't just a
waste of your money that something
wasn't just a waste of your time or
waste of your resources many people who
spend hundreds of hours playing video
games eagerly want to believe excuses
that they have somehow cultivated some
redeeming qualities of character that
they've somehow improved their ability
to focus on tasks they've gained some
valuable skill and obviously the line of
reasoning I've opened up here in this
discussion deeply challenges that
yearning it makes them reflect on what
they've done with video games as just a
waste of time however I think we are
trivializing the question if we only
engage in it in terms of contrasting
what's a waste of time - what is a
meaningful use of your time I think that
is really an inappropriately shallow way
to discuss the problem of video games
although hey I try to make videos that
are shorter than 40 minutes long
discussing the issue so sometimes I do
have to be a bit shell of myself I have
to simplify the issue talk about it in
this way um to say that it's a waste of
time he's misleading what we really want
to reflect on as adults is what kind of
person chooses to play video games and
then what kind of person do I become by
investing my time
I'm playing for you how does it change
me and I think what these people writing
in to me are desperate to ignore are the
very negative effects that they're aware
of themselves terms of the habits of
mind the traits of character that
playing video games for long hours
inexorably leads to playing video games
people say it causes impatience
frustration and inability to have
equanimity and a caring engaged
character when talking other people
face-to-face this is partly of course
because we experience time so very
differently when playing video games on
the one hand video games involve us in a
moment-to-moment gratification pressing
a button at just the right split-second
at just the right instant is crucial to
doing well in games but on the other
hand it brings us into a very different
perception of time where for hours can
disappear as if it were nothing right
people who play video games have no time
for cooking or cleaning they start to
eat the simplest instant food imaginable
to devote that time of the video games
yes but then the way they perceive time
when they deal with the frustrations of
work colleagues and friends and lovers
their impatience for their frustration
with reading a book studying sitting
still dealing with the stupidity of
others in a caring concerned or patient
way which is part of life for all of us
you know sometimes people are stupid and
we can't punish them and we can't just
press a button to solve the problem we
have to have some patience and
engagement and so on I think that when
we talk about impatience we're actually
using a very simple sounding word for
quite a complex phenomenon and the way
in which video games lead us to be
impatient and frustrated and punitive
care
in relation to other people and it's an
absolutely terrible set of character
trades and I am just gonna appeal to my
audience with their own anecdotal
expense I think you know I think you
know if you search your own feelings if
you reflect on your own youth your own
experiences of playing video games I
think you know this is true if you think
about what it means to be a
compassionate open engaged curious
person you know if you think about what
it means to be caring someone video
games do not cultivate these these
qualities of character right many people
talk about this in terms of you know the
dopamine reaction and instant
gratification and they try to they try
to narrow it down to a flowchart but I
think the truth is it's something quite
profound that we can't simplify in this
way we can't just talk about it in terms
of a waste of time we can't just talk
about it in terms of dopamine reaction
and short-term gratification in terms of
just how profound the difference is let
me say this I am vegan if you take
someone who eats a cheeseburger diet
someone who eats normal American foods
meat and cheese would have you and then
one day they go on vacation for two
weeks they eat a vegan diet so in effect
for two weeks they quit meat they quit
cheese I don't think there's any
tremendous change in how they perceive
the world in how emotionally they react
to the world in how intellectually they
engage though I don't think there's any
big change even though I'm vegan
I'm fond of veganism I think veganism is
quite shallow compared to the profound
change you undergo if you're playing
video games every day for three hours a
day let's say and then one day you go on
vacation and in the circumstances of
that book vacation for two weeks you
have no computer no console no cell
phone no internet access no video games
of any kind some of you will have
experienced that maybe in your childhood
or something
there is really a profound shift in how
emotionally and intellectually you
relate to the outside world that's
linked to video games being a dominant
part of your daily life or the absence
of videos not having video games I
really mean that
I'm not trivializing or dismissing video
games lately if anything I'm inviting
everyone in the audience to reflect much
more deeply on just how profound a
difference in our lives video games
really make emotionally and
intellectually in the cultivation of our
character in look if English is your
first language reading a book in English
is not difficult but one of the most
commonly reported things of people who
you know if you're devoting two and
three hours a day or more than three
hours a day to playing video games is
this sense of frustration with how slow
and unrewarding it is to focus your mind
and read a book a book on paper to learn
from a book that isn't isn't telling you
instantly what you want to know it's not
like a pop-up dialog on a computer it's
not a problem that can be solved but
pushing a button it's not a problem that
can be solved by one glowing character
punching another glowing character in
the face over and over and over again
the type of dulling of the social
instincts that comes about through video
games and the sharpening of a certain
sense set of 80 social instincts I think
it's something all of us have experience
with even if you've only had one brief
period of your life when you played
video games great deal okay
now the counter arguments that have been
advanced to me the most legitimate of
the counter arguments they either rely
on a claim that if we calibrate this
down to a fine enough point video games
cease to be a problem at all which is
saying oh well what if it's only 20
minutes a day what if it's
only five minutes a day look if I tell
you a certain food is unhealthy to eat
that doesn't mean that half a teaspoon
of that food once a month is unhealthy
to eat it means it's a healthy to be
part of your diet in the way that it's
commonly consumed in our culture right I
mean the unhealthiest foods imaginable
when they get down to minuscule
quantities all of us in our diet in the
modern world we all eat steel we all eat
aluminum we all eat dish soap there's
soap left on your food and dishes and
you eat it's on your fork and knife soap
is not healthy to eat but in tiny
amounts you can tolerate it and all of
us do if you're willing to reduce this
down to a point of absurdity you know of
course I mean my argument against plain
we're doing is for three hours a day it
doesn't make sense if it's against
playing video games for five minutes a
day of course I have to concede this
point but then by the same token if you
concede that there is a quantity of
nicotine so low there's a quantity of
cigarette so small that the effects on
your health both mental health and
physical health are not significant or
it's not addictive and where your body
is just coping with the toxin you know
what's the implication of that what are
you saying that the fact that
hypothetically it's possible for someone
to ingest such a tiny amount of nicotine
that it's not harmful for them does that
mean we're wrong to say that nicotine is
harmful does that mean I'm wrong to
question what kind of person smokes
cigarettes and what kind of a person do
you become through nicotine addiction
what kind of characteristics what
happens if care and that that's the same
question I'm asking about video games so
this is one line of rationalisation
diversification and then the other
people trying to claim again this is
really on that emotional basis of the
sunk cost fallacy trying to claim that
there's some positive character of mine
they get out of it
some characteristics some ability some
form of mental acuity to get out of this
that will justify the thousands of hours
put into video games no I feel I already
addressed this quite a lot in my earlier
video I talked about two major forms of
fallacious reasoning it's a very briefly
to restate there's a problem of lack of
consideration of opportunity cost what
it is were comparing this to we can't
compare it to nothing and you're I am
forgetting what was the second point
again kindest oh yes and the fact that
the skills are not transferable to the
real world so becoming very skilled at a
video game doesn't mean that you have a
skill that can be used for anything
other than a video game maybe not even
for other genres of video games right so
that was discussed at some length in the
earlier video the other point is this
the value of whatever it is you can
learn from a video game has to be
compared to the level of mental
accomplishment you are at before
commencing that process so I mean the
claim being made that a video game can
increase your interest in the history of
world war ii only if you were starting
from a position of like total ignorance
or you know a grade 3 level of education
oh wow gee world war ii seems it was ok
for someone at that low level of
ignorance yes it's possible a video game
conforth what what does this justify
again it seems like these two problems
each relates to the other so how many
minutes of playing a video game would be
justified by this educational benefit
that looks someone who knows nothing
about world war ii will learn a little
bit if this is the first learning about
it right i mean this doesn't justify
playing a video game for three hours a
day it doesn't justify playing a game
for 40 hours in total that there's a
tiny tiny amount of educational value
but only relative to the assumption that
you knew absolutely nothing at the
beginning now look but still i can
concede the point there were probably i
mean i
when I was growing up in Canada there
were children who didn't know that India
was a country I remember that they had
never heard of India either well I
remember that you know I remember one
kid this is in junior high who had never
heard of Israel and he was asking me you
know what is Israel you know I you know
there were you know really basic facts
of geography in history one of my
professors actually once said to me that
he had a student at University in first
year of University who had never heard
of World War one and who had also never
heard of World War two there's someone
who had completed high school and was
managed to get in the university he it
was kind of a funny story the student
came up to the front of the class he
said sorry during today's lecture you
referred to World War two so does that
mean there was another war before what
what we talked so yes I mean there are
some people as children or even as
teenagers where you know again in the
case of India I can really imagine there
might be someone who's so totally
ignorant of India including by the way
like here in China there are Chinese
people who just have no awareness of the
history and culture of India next door
and a video game that makes India look
intriguing and exotic oh wow okay
there's this place called India
but but would this be a five minute
education - ten minutes this is not
three hours this is not 40 hours it's
not three hours differ very very little
just like that and again the next steps
you'd have to take if you did get
interested India you'd at least have to
go and read a Wikipedia article you'd
have to read a book you'd have to watch
a documentary film you'd have to do
something more productive than playing
video so these same issues were brought
up turned inside out in a very different
manner by a longtime viewer of the
channel who wrote to me saying that
she's in a relationship to people dating
one of the two people reads novels one
of the two people plays video games and
the video game player plays video games
for perhaps ten hours per week so this
would not be considered an addiction but
ten hours per week still a significant
amount of time and the woman writing in
to me said look
she is willing to admit that reading
novels is considered a good use of her
time considered not a waste of time
largely just due to kind of cultural
prejudices we have that were raised to
regard novels as somehow a very refined
thing to do with your mind she doesn't
feel that reading these novels now as an
adult I'm guessing she's about
twenty-two years old she doesn't feel
that she's really learning anything from
these novels I sympathize it's
completely possible that's true reading
a book doesn't guarantee there's some
kind of wonderful educational fight from
the book some books may be so terrible
that you learn less from a book that you
learn from it's possible
you know the fact that something is
printed in book form doesn't mean it's a
wonderful educational experience so she
is willing to regard the novels she
reads even though many of them are
considered great books of literature as
mere entertainment I I sympathize with
her view I sympathize with her
skepticism about the value of reading
novels and she asked the question look
is it really so different should should
she really be so harsh in regarding
video-game-playing which goes on I
assume in her own apartment there
partner there for maybe ten hours a week
or something like that the value of
reading novels is relative to your level
of ignorance much as I said before all
right there are eight year olds and ten
year olds for whom reading a novel will
improve their vocabulary will improve
their spelling will improve their
sentence structure for myself as a 41
year old man already had a very high
level of literacy in English I'm not
going to improve anymore
reading a novel in English is gonna have
almost zero educational value for me
unless it's a novel that's really
specifically about some kind of
historical situation that I'm
researching unless there's some kind of
factual nonfiction value in the novel
there's some reason why this should be
important to me right which should be
extraordinary and would be rare okay so
when your parents and school teachers
and professors encourage you to read
novels you know they may not have been
crazy the value of the novels themselves
doesn't diminish as we get older the
value is subjective it's relative to you
okay bread is not delicious the value of
bread is relative to an empty stomach a
heart and a mind that desires it if you
are hungry enough bread tastes delicious
if you're already full it may taste like
nothing at all the value of the bread is
not inherent to the bread is not
intrinsic to the bread it's extrinsic it
arises from our own desire our own lack
our own sense of want okay so the value
of these novels the value of these even
great works of literature okay for the
most part were kind of trained to
misperceive it or overrated because it
does have some significance in terms of
pedagogy in terms of the education of
children now the woman who wrote in to
me let me ask you what if you read the
same novel in Chinese I recently got
tempted to read the novel Gone with the
Wind in choice I'm glad I talked myself
out of it so Gone with the Wind is a
novel about white people in the United
States of America who owned black slaves
but I would be interested in learning
the vocabulary and even the sentence
structure for how in Chinese they would
talk about the history of slavery in
America all right you could imagine what
an incredibly difficult educational
experience would be for me or for you to
read that novel in Chinese however
reading it in English you know obviously
if I'm really interested in history of
slavery in this to the Civil War there
were better things
I can read okay so it is a very peculiar
comparison and in this context where
video games aren't attached to other
problems they're not attached to obesity
or ruining your education you know
dropping out of school it's not attached
to dropping into college it's not
leading to you losing your job so you
know this is a couple where one person
reads books the other person plays video
games and in this case there isn't a
problem with the waste of time element
destroying someone's life not leading to
the distant disintegration of their
relationship or anything else okay but
this is where we have to stop and really
reflect on the extent to which the
problem with video games fundamentally
is not just that they're a waste of time
the problem is precisely in the
cultivation of your own character the
problem is in asking that question what
kind of person what kind of adult plays
video games what kind of adult makes
excuses for playing video games right
and then what kind of a person do you
become how does that transform your
character as time goes on now I say this
skeptically I have known white men who
speak English who slept with prostitutes
I knew one guy who started sleeping with
prostitutes
he started sleeping prostitutes a very
young guy I've known several other men
who made the decision at different times
of their life to commit to sleeping with
process I remember I met I met and spoke
at length with one guy he'd only ever
had one girlfriend he dated one woman
and it didn't go well it didn't work out
and then he just started sleeping with
prostitutes for the rest of his life he
never he never had a normal relationship
again I'm not here to demonize and
vilify the role the prostitute himself
or herself I'm not here to fearmonger
about prostitution with the other
there is a very profound question how
for these men for the clients of
prostitutes how does it change their
character who do they become over time
Sigma positives and we all again even
just intuitively we have some sense of
this of the danger the danger for
corroding the corrosive effect on our
lives and our character if we start to
go down this road right if we engage in
the commodification of of sexuality if
the most intimate relationships in our
lives becomes something that's bought
and sold right apart from the question
of the impact in the life of the
prostitute or the economy or ethical
questions that are external just
subjectively just in a self-centered way
I think there has to be a profound sense
of concern for what kind of a man pays
prostitutes
what kind of a man makes excuses for
paying prostitutes for sex again if if
this is you if this is you over time
doing this again and again what kind of
person do you become and of course it's
interesting to note I don't think anyone
is wealthy enough very few people are
wealthy enough that they could possibly
be spending 10 hours a week with
prostitutes these are this is probably
some of these guys did for two hours a
month or something I mean all right
multimillionaires could be spending 10
hours a week if the company of
prostitutes like for the most part this
doesn't add up to many hours the way
video games do right and of course part
of my interaction with these guys was
using Socratic method to challenge the
excuses they made because I warned you
again and again
quitting video games is hard quitting
the excuses is even harder overcoming
the excuse making mentality is the
hardest part of all all right and these
guys who sleep with prostitutes even if
they only super the prostitutes for two
hours a week four hours a week whatever
it is they're living with the
uses 24 hours a day seven days a week
and those excuses changed the way they
feel they change the way they feel about
women to change the way they feel about
relationships they change the way they
feel about earning money in the economy
right they change the excuses they live
with change the way they see the world
change the way that they emotionally and
intellectually experience them that's
the most startling concerning corrosive
thing about video games when you play
video games as an adult for many hours a
week all right
it changes the way emotionally and
intellectually you react to the world it
changes the way you perceive the world
it changes the way you feel about the
world and that's why it's such a shock
it's so strange it's such an adjustment
if you go from playing video games for
three hours a day to stop it what that's
on a vacation or otherwise even if you
didn't choose to quit but you just
circumstances for a couple of weeks
you're cut off from all that you stop
playing video games and you start to
feel differently you start to think
differently you start to perceive time
differently you start to relate to other
people differently there are all these
changes that come into your life right
and I admit quitting meet by contrast is
much more shallow I think I'm going to
ask you I think that quitting nicotine
quitting smoking is much more shallow
when we talk about the impatience of
that video-game-playing mentality and
you know the excuses that you have to
wear like armor all the time right the
same way that these the guys who the men
who sleep with prostitutes to some
extent they're always wearing this armor
because they don't want to feel ugly
they don't want to feel weak they don't
want to feel immoral they don't want to
feel stupid if they don't want to feel
like a trick
we're going to say you know they know
that this is something shameful they
know this is something most people in
the society think they should be ashamed
of and some of them to some extent feel
ashamed or feel regret or just feel some
wish that they could have lived another
way or a better way some of them not all
of them right but they wear the armor of
their excuses all the time okay whether
they do that by mocking it and making
light of it and joking about it
whether they do it by presenting
tremendously serious philosophies that
justify their I've heard it all I've
heard the whole range of those kinds of
excuses and actually I've read books
about it too I did some formal desk
research on that topic which is quite
quitters there have been some put good
books written about that okay men who
spend hundreds of hours adult men who
spent hundreds of hours engaged in
children's entertainment playing video
games they also live wearing an armor to
try to separate themselves from that
sense of shame they want to feel strong
not weak they want to feel smart not
stupid they never want to face up to
that sunk cost fallacy where they look
back at their life and say wow I had
amazing opportunities and I squandered
them sitting on the couch playing this
fundamentally childish repetitive and
yes addictive form of entertainment
video games